README.md, before:

# 👗 Advanced Multimodal Fashion Recommender
This project is a cutting-edge fashion search engine that leverages Multimodal Embeddings, Generative AI (LLMs), and Vector Databases to provide highly accurate, budget-aware product recommendations. By integrating visual features with semantic intent and price constraints, the system handles complex natural language queries like "Elegant teal Anarkali for a wedding under 4000" with sub-second precision.

## 🚀 System Architecture & Procedure
```
The recommendation engine follows a sophisticated four-stage pipeline to bridge the gap between human language and visual fashion attributes.

1. Data Engineering & Semantic Fusion

The foundation of the system is built on a dataset of over 14,000 fashion products.

Semantic Concatenation: To maximize search accuracy, unstructured attributes (brand, color, material, and style) were fused into a single unified semantic string (final_text).

Price Normalization: Since price is a critical search dimension, I implemented a Log-Transformation followed by Min-Max Scaling to ensure budget constraints are mathematically aligned with semantic vectors.

2. The 1025-Dimensional "Master Vector"

The core innovation is a custom Master Vector architecture that allows for simultaneous visual, textual, and economic search.

Vector Composition: [Visual Part (512)] + [Text Part (512)] + [Normalized Price (1)].

Weighted Retrieval: During the search, visual signals are weighted (1.5x) to prioritize style and aesthetics, while the text and price components ensure the results match the specific brand and budget intent.

3. Real-time Search Intent (LLM Reasoning)

To handle the "gap" between a user's short query and a machine's vector requirements, the system uses Gemini 2.0 Flash.

Visual Expansion: Gemini expands a simple query into a rich, CLIP-optimized description (e.g., "red dress" becomes "A vibrant crimson maxi dress in flowy chiffon, suitable for formal evening events").

Few-Shot Prompting: The system uses in-context learning to extract precise price filters and design attributes in structured JSON format.

4. Vector Storage & HNSW Retrieval

ChromaDB: All 14,000+ master vectors are stored in a persistent ChromaDB collection.

Semantic Search: The system uses Cosine Similarity to retrieve the top 6 matches in milliseconds, even on local hardware like a MacBook Air.
```
## 🛠️ Tech Stack
```
Multimodal AI: OpenAI CLIP (ViT-B/32)

Generative AI: Google Gemini 2.0 Flash (via google-genai SDK)

Vector DB: ChromaDB (Persistent Storage)

Data Processing: Pandas, NumPy, Scikit-learn (Min-Max Scaling, Log-Transforms)

Frontend: Streamlit (Responsive UI)

Inference: PyTorch (MPS/CUDA support)
```

## 📦 Project Structure
Plaintext
├── data_analysis.ipynb      # EDA, feature engineering, and price scaling logic
├── embeddings.ipynb          # CLIP vector generation & ChromaDB ingestion
├── app.py                    # Streamlit frontend & integrated search logic
├── price_scaler.pkl          # Persisted MinMaxScaler for search alignment
├── .env                      # API Credentials (ignored by git)
└── requirements.txt          # Project dependencies


## ⚙️ Setup & Installation
```
Clone & Environment:
Bash
git clone https://github.com/your-username/fashion-recommender.git
cd fashion-recommender
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
API Key: Create a .env file and add: GEMINI_API_KEY=your_google_ai_key.

Run Ingestion: Execute the code in embeddings.ipynb to generate the fashion_vector_db folder.
```

## Launch App:
```
Bash
python -m streamlit run app.py
💡 Key Challenges Solved
Context Window Limits: Managed CLIP’s 77-token limit by implementing truncation and prompt constraints within the LLM expansion logic.

Attribute Sparsity: Solved the issue of missing descriptions by engineering a "Semantic Proxy" string from available product attributes.

Scale: Optimized the ingestion process into batches of 1000 to handle over 14,000 items efficiently.
```

Commit message:

Update README with dataset link and formatting changes
Added a link to the original dataset and updated section headings for clarity.

README.md, after:

# 👗 Advanced Multimodal Fashion Recommender
This project is a cutting-edge fashion search engine that leverages Multimodal Embeddings, Generative AI (LLMs), and Vector Databases to provide highly accurate, budget-aware product recommendations. By integrating visual features with semantic intent and price constraints, the system handles complex natural language queries like "Elegant teal Anarkali for a wedding under 4000" with sub-second precision.

Image Folder consists of Random 100- 200 images, if one wants to refer the original dataset and Image folder, then please refer to this link: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/djagatiya/myntra-fashion-product-dataset

## 🚀 System Architecture & Procedure
The recommendation engine follows a sophisticated four-stage pipeline to bridge the gap between human language and visual fashion attributes.

### 1. Data Engineering & Semantic Fusion

The foundation of the system is built on a dataset of over 14,000 fashion products.

Semantic Concatenation: To maximize search accuracy, unstructured attributes (brand, color, material, and style) were fused into a single unified semantic string (final_text).

Price Normalization: Since price is a critical search dimension, I implemented a Log-Transformation followed by Min-Max Scaling to ensure budget constraints are mathematically aligned with semantic vectors.

### 2. The 1025-Dimensional "Master Vector"

The core innovation is a custom Master Vector architecture that allows for simultaneous visual, textual, and economic search.

Vector Composition: [Visual Part (512)] + [Text Part (512)] + [Normalized Price (1)].

Weighted Retrieval: During the search, visual signals are weighted (1.5x) to prioritize style and aesthetics, while the text and price components ensure the results match the specific brand and budget intent.

### 3. Real-time Search Intent (LLM Reasoning)

To handle the "gap" between a user's short query and a machine's vector requirements, the system uses Gemini 2.0 Flash.

Visual Expansion: Gemini expands a simple query into a rich, CLIP-optimized description (e.g., "red dress" becomes "A vibrant crimson maxi dress in flowy chiffon, suitable for formal evening events").

Few-Shot Prompting: The system uses in-context learning to extract precise price filters and design attributes in structured JSON format.

### 4. Vector Storage & HNSW Retrieval

ChromaDB: All 14,000+ master vectors are stored in a persistent ChromaDB collection.

Semantic Search: The system uses Cosine Similarity to retrieve the top 6 matches in milliseconds, even on local hardware like a MacBook Air.

## 🛠️ Tech Stack

Multimodal AI: OpenAI CLIP (ViT-B/32)

Generative AI: Google Gemini 2.0 Flash (via google-genai SDK)

Vector DB: ChromaDB (Persistent Storage)

Data Processing: Pandas, NumPy, Scikit-learn (Min-Max Scaling, Log-Transforms)

Frontend: Streamlit (Responsive UI)

Inference: PyTorch (MPS/CUDA support)

## 📦 Project Structure
Plaintext
├── data_analysis.ipynb      # EDA, feature engineering, and price scaling logic
├── embeddings.ipynb          # CLIP vector generation & ChromaDB ingestion
├── app.py                    # Streamlit frontend & integrated search logic
├── price_scaler.pkl          # Persisted MinMaxScaler for search alignment
├── .env                      # API Credentials (ignored by git)
└── requirements.txt          # Project dependencies


## ⚙️ Setup & Installation
```
Clone & Environment:
Bash
git clone https://github.com/your-username/fashion-recommender.git
cd fashion-recommender
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate
pip install -r requirements.txt
API Key: Create a .env file and add: GEMINI_API_KEY=your_google_ai_key.

Run Ingestion: Execute the code in embeddings.ipynb to generate the fashion_vector_db folder.
```

## Launch App:
```
Bash
python -m streamlit run app.py
💡 Key Challenges Solved
Context Window Limits: Managed CLIP’s 77-token limit by implementing truncation and prompt constraints within the LLM expansion logic.

Attribute Sparsity: Solved the issue of missing descriptions by engineering a "Semantic Proxy" string from available product attributes.

Scale: Optimized the ingestion process into batches of 1000 to handle over 14,000 items efficiently.
```
